---
abstract: |
  This thesis explores the development of efficient neural network
  models through knowledge distillation and pruning. It details the
  methodology for compressing a large teacher model (e.g.,
  DeepSeek-R1-0528-Qwen3-8B) into a smaller student model (e.g.,
  gemma-2b-it), aiming to retain performance on specialized tasks such
  as electronic circuit design while significantly reducing parameter
  count. The work includes the implementation of a distillation pipeline
  with L1 regularization, tools for benchmarking on CS-Bench, and a
  process for fine-tuning the student model on a custom dataset. This
  document presents the theoretical background, implementation details
  (`distill_demo.py`, `finetune_student.py`, `benchmark_csbench.py`),
  and a framework for evaluating the compressed model. Placeholder
  sections for detailed experimental results and discussion are provided
  for completion by the researcher. The goal is to provide a
  comprehensive guide and toolkit for creating and evaluating
  specialized, compressed language models.
author:
- |
  USER_NAME_PLACEHOLDER\
  Student ID: YOUR_ID_PLACEHOLDER\
  `user.email@example.com`
bibliography:
- references.bib
date: MONTH_YEAR_PLACEHOLDER
title: |
  THESIS_TITLE_PLACEHOLDER\
  A Study on Model Compression via Distillation and Pruning for
  Efficient Deep Learning in Electronic Technology Design
---

-   [Introduction](#chap:introduction){#toc-chap:introduction}
    -   [Background on Model
        Compression](#sec:background_compression){#toc-sec:background_compression}
    -   [Thesis Objectives and
        Scope](#sec:objectives_scope){#toc-sec:objectives_scope}
    -   [Structure of the
        Thesis](#sec:thesis_structure){#toc-sec:thesis_structure}
-   [Literature
    Review](#chap:literature_review){#toc-chap:literature_review}
    -   [Overview of Model
        Compression](#sec:overview_model_compression){#toc-sec:overview_model_compression}
    -   [Knowledge Distillation
        In-Depth](#sec:kd_in_depth){#toc-sec:kd_in_depth}
    -   [Network Pruning
        Techniques](#sec:pruning_techniques_review){#toc-sec:pruning_techniques_review}
    -   [Applications in Specialized
        Domains](#sec:applications_specialized_domains){#toc-sec:applications_specialized_domains}
-   [Materials and Methods](#chap:methods){#toc-chap:methods}
    -   [Knowledge
        Distillation](#sec:knowledge_distillation_methods){#toc-sec:knowledge_distillation_methods}
        -   [Teacher-Student
            Paradigm](#teacher-student-paradigm){#toc-teacher-student-paradigm}
        -   [Knowledge Transfer
            Mechanisms](#knowledge-transfer-mechanisms){#toc-knowledge-transfer-mechanisms}
    -   [Network
        Pruning](#sec:network_pruning_methods){#toc-sec:network_pruning_methods}
        -   [Types of Pruning](#types-of-pruning){#toc-types-of-pruning}
        -   [Layer Freezing](#layer-freezing){#toc-layer-freezing}
    -   [Lightweight Transformer
        Architecture](#sec:lightweight_architecture){#toc-sec:lightweight_architecture}
    -   [Mathematical Principles of Implemented Loss
        Functions](#sec:math_loss_functions){#toc-sec:math_loss_functions}
        -   [Cross-Entropy Loss (Task
            Loss)](#cross-entropy-loss-task-loss){#toc-cross-entropy-loss-task-loss}
        -   [KL Divergence Loss (Distillation
            Loss)](#kl-divergence-loss-distillation-loss){#toc-kl-divergence-loss-distillation-loss}
        -   [Combined Loss](#combined-loss){#toc-combined-loss}
        -   [L1 Regularization Penalty
            (Pruning)](#l1-regularization-penalty-pruning){#toc-l1-regularization-penalty-pruning}
    -   [Implementation Details: `distill_demo.py`
        Script](#sec:distill_demo_walkthrough){#toc-sec:distill_demo_walkthrough}
        -   [Setup and
            Configuration](#setup-and-configuration){#toc-setup-and-configuration}
        -   [Model and Tokenizer
            Loading](#model-and-tokenizer-loading){#toc-model-and-tokenizer-loading}
        -   [Dataset Preparation
            (`DistillationDataset`)](#dataset-preparation-distillationdataset){#toc-dataset-preparation-distillationdataset}
        -   [Distillation Training
            Loop](#distillation-training-loop){#toc-distillation-training-loop}
        -   [Loss Calculation](#loss-calculation){#toc-loss-calculation}
        -   [Optimization](#optimization){#toc-optimization}
        -   [Model Saving](#model-saving){#toc-model-saving}
-   [Results](#chap:results){#toc-chap:results}
    -   [Experimental
        Setup](#sec:experimental_setup){#toc-sec:experimental_setup}
    -   [Teacher Model Baseline
        Performance](#sec:teacher_baseline){#toc-sec:teacher_baseline}
        -   [Placeholder Table for Teacher Model
            Results](#placeholder-table-for-teacher-model-results){#toc-placeholder-table-for-teacher-model-results}
    -   [Student Model Performance
        Evaluation](#sec:student_performance){#toc-sec:student_performance}
        -   [Baseline Student Model (Before
            Distillation)](#ssec:student_baseline){#toc-ssec:student_baseline}
        -   [Student Model After
            Distillation](#ssec:student_after_distillation){#toc-ssec:student_after_distillation}
        -   [Student Model After Fine-tuning (on Custom
            Dataset)](#ssec:student_after_finetuning){#toc-ssec:student_after_finetuning}
    -   [Pruning
        Effects](#sec:pruning_effects){#toc-sec:pruning_effects}
-   [Discussion](#chap:discussion){#toc-chap:discussion}
    -   [Analysis of
        Results](#sec:analysis_of_results){#toc-sec:analysis_of_results}
    -   [Implications of the
        Work](#sec:implications_of_work){#toc-sec:implications_of_work}
    -   [Limitations of the Current
        Study](#sec:limitations_of_study){#toc-sec:limitations_of_study}
    -   [Future
        Work](#sec:future_work_discussion){#toc-sec:future_work_discussion}
-   [Conclusions](#chap:conclusions_final){#toc-chap:conclusions_final}
-   [Supplemental Material
    (Example)](#app:supplemental){#toc-app:supplemental}

**Keywords:** Model Compression, Knowledge Distillation, Network
Pruning, Deep Learning, Transformer Models, Student-Teacher Paradigm, L1
Regularization, Electronic Technology Design, Efficient AI, Fine-tuning,
Benchmarking.

# Introduction {#chap:introduction}

This chapter introduces the research topic of model compression in the
context of large language models. It defines the problem of deploying
computationally intensive models in resource-constrained environments,
particularly for specialized domains like electronic technology design.
The chapter outlines the primary objectives and scope of this thesis,
and concludes with an overview of the document's structure.

## Background on Model Compression {#sec:background_compression}

Large-scale neural networks, while achieving state-of-the-art
performance in various domains, often come with prohibitive
computational demands and memory footprints. Model compression
techniques aim to alleviate these issues. This document focuses on two
such popular methods: knowledge distillation and network pruning. These
methods are crucial for making advanced AI models more accessible and
deployable across a wider range of applications.

## Thesis Objectives and Scope {#sec:objectives_scope}

This thesis aims to explore, implement, and evaluate model compression
techniques, specifically knowledge distillation and L1
regularization-induced pruning, to create an efficient student model
derived from a larger, more capable teacher model. The primary
application focus is on generating a model that is proficient in tasks
related to electronic technology design, demonstrating the viability of
creating specialized, compact models.

The scope of this work encompasses:

-   A review of relevant literature in model compression, distillation,
    and pruning.

-   The development of a comprehensive methodology for knowledge
    distillation, incorporating task-specific fine-tuning and L1
    regularization.

-   The implementation of a software pipeline, including scripts for
    distillation (`distill_demo.py`), custom dataset fine-tuning
    (`finetune_student.py`), and benchmarking (`benchmark_csbench.py`).

-   Establishing procedures for evaluating the student model's
    performance against the teacher model and a baseline student model,
    focusing on metrics such as exact match accuracy on relevant
    CS-Bench tasks and qualitative assessment of custom task
    performance.

-   Analyzing the trade-offs between model size reduction, computational
    efficiency, and task performance.

## Structure of the Thesis {#sec:thesis_structure}

This thesis is organized into the following chapters:

-   **Chapter 1: Introduction** provides background on model
    compression, outlines the thesis objectives, scope, and structure.

-   **Chapter 2: Literature Review** discusses existing work in model
    compression, knowledge distillation, network pruning, and their
    applications.

-   **Chapter 3: Materials and Methods** details the models, datasets,
    software tools (`distill_demo.py`, `finetune_student.py`,
    `benchmark_csbench.py`), and experimental procedures used in this
    research. This includes the mathematical principles behind the loss
    functions and the specifics of the distillation and fine-tuning
    processes.

-   **Chapter 4: Results** presents the findings from the benchmarking
    and evaluation of the teacher, baseline student, and
    distilled/fine-tuned student models. (User to populate with their
    experimental data).

-   **Chapter 5: Discussion** interprets the results, discusses their
    implications for creating specialized models in electronic
    technology design, and addresses the limitations of the study. (User
    to populate).

-   **Chapter 6: Conclusions** summarizes the key findings,
    contributions of the thesis, and suggests directions for future
    research.

# Literature Review {#chap:literature_review}

This chapter reviews existing literature relevant to model compression,
knowledge distillation, network pruning, and their applications,
particularly in contexts similar to electronic technology design. It
aims to provide a theoretical foundation for the methods adopted in this
thesis and to position the current work within the broader field of
efficient deep learning.

## Overview of Model Compression {#sec:overview_model_compression}

The demand for deploying large-scale deep learning models on devices
with limited computational resources or in latency-sensitive
applications has driven significant research into model compression.
Common techniques include:

-   **Quantization:** Reducing the precision of model weights and
    activations (e.g., from 32-bit floating point to 8-bit integers).

-   **Network Pruning:** Removing redundant parameters or structural
    components from the network.

-   **Knowledge Distillation:** Training a smaller \"student\" model to
    mimic a larger \"teacher\" model.

-   **Neural Architecture Search (NAS):** Automatically discovering
    optimal model architectures for specific tasks and constraints.

-   **Low-Rank Factorization:** Decomposing large weight matrices into
    smaller matrices to reduce parameters.

This thesis focuses primarily on knowledge distillation and network
pruning (specifically through L1 regularization).

## Knowledge Distillation In-Depth {#sec:kd_in_depth}

Knowledge distillation, introduced by Hinton et al. (2015) in its modern
form, leverages the idea that a well-trained teacher model's output
distribution (soft labels) provides more information than hard labels
alone. Variants of knowledge distillation include:

-   **Response-Based KD:** Matches the final output (logits or
    probabilities) of the student with the teacher. This is the primary
    approach used in this thesis.

-   **Feature-Based KD:** Trains the student to mimic intermediate layer
    representations of the teacher.

-   **Relation-Based KD:** Considers relationships between different
    layers or feature maps.

## Network Pruning Techniques {#sec:pruning_techniques_review}

Network pruning aims to reduce model complexity by eliminating
unnecessary weights or structures. Key distinctions include:

-   **Unstructured Pruning:** Individual weights are removed, leading to
    sparse models that may require specialized hardware/software for
    efficiency gains. Magnitude-based pruning is a common example, often
    encouraged by L1 regularization as implemented in this thesis.

-   **Structured Pruning:** Entire neurons, channels, or even layers are
    removed, resulting in smaller, dense models that are easier to
    deploy on standard hardware.

Common criteria for pruning include weight magnitude, gradient
information, or contributions to network activations or loss.

## Applications in Specialized Domains {#sec:applications_specialized_domains}

Model compression is particularly relevant for deploying models in
resource-constrained environments (e.g., mobile devices, edge computing)
or for specialized tasks where efficiency is paramount. For Natural
Language Processing (NLP), compressed models are crucial for tasks in
specific technical domains, such as the target area of \"electronic
circuit design.\" Creating smaller, yet knowledgeable, models can enable
faster local processing, reduced costs, and privacy-preserving
applications.

# Materials and Methods {#chap:methods}

This chapter will detail the methodologies used in the research,
including:

-   The architecture of the teacher and student models.

-   The datasets used for training and evaluation (e.g., custom dataset
    for fine-tuning, CS-Bench for benchmarking).

-   The implementation details of the distillation process (loss
    functions, hyperparameters).

-   The pruning techniques applied (e.g., L1 regularization).

-   The evaluation metrics and benchmarking setup.

The `distill_demo.py` and `benchmark_csbench.py` scripts, along with the
custom fine-tuning script `finetune_student.py`, will be central to this
chapter.

## Knowledge Distillation {#sec:knowledge_distillation_methods}

Knowledge distillation is a model compression technique where a smaller
'student' model is trained to mimic the behavior of a larger,
pre-trained 'teacher' model. The core idea is to transfer the
'knowledge' learned by the teacher model to the student model.

### Teacher-Student Paradigm

The teacher model is typically a high-capacity model that has been
trained on a large dataset. The student model has a significantly
smaller architecture (fewer parameters, layers, etc.). The goal is for
the student to learn not just the ground truth labels but also the
nuanced output distribution of the teacher.

<figure id="fig:teacher_student">

<figcaption>Conceptual overview of the knowledge distillation
process.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Knowledge Transfer Mechanisms

#### Soft Labels (Logits Distillation)

Instead of using hard labels (one-hot encoded ground truth) for training
the student, distillation often uses the softened outputs (logits before
softmax, or probabilities after softmax with temperature scaling) from
the teacher model as targets. The teacher's logits provide richer
information about inter-class similarities. The distillation loss, often
using Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, measures the difference between
the teacher's and student's output distributions. The probability $p_i$
for a class $i$ is calculated using a softmax function with temperature
$T$: $$p_i = \frac{\exp(z_i / T)}{\sum_j \exp(z_j / T)}$$ where $z_i$
are the logits. A higher temperature $T > 1$ softens the probability
distribution, allowing the student to learn from smaller logit values.

#### Feature Distillation

Knowledge can also be transferred by encouraging the student model's
intermediate layer representations (features) to be similar to those of
the teacher model. This can help the student learn the teacher's
internal reasoning process.

## Network Pruning {#sec:network_pruning_methods}

Network pruning aims to reduce model size by removing redundant or less
important parameters, neurons, or even entire structural components from
a trained network.

### Types of Pruning

#### Unstructured Pruning

Individual weights are removed based on some criterion (e.g.,
magnitude). This can lead to sparse weight matrices that require
specialized hardware or libraries for efficient inference.

##### Magnitude Pruning:

Weights with absolute values below a certain threshold are set to zero.
L1 regularization during training is a common way to encourage weights
to become small, effectively pruning them. The L1 penalty added to the
loss function is: $$L_{L1} = \lambda \sum_i |\theta_i|$$ where
$\theta_i$ are the model parameters and $\lambda$ is the regularization
strength.

<figure id="fig:param_dist">

<figcaption>Conceptual visualization of parameter distribution changes
due to pruning using L1 regularization.</figcaption>
</figure>

#### Structured Pruning

Entire neurons, channels, or layers are removed. This results in a
smaller, dense model that can be run efficiently on standard hardware.

### Layer Freezing

A specific form of structured pruning or model adaptation where entire
layers, particularly those deemed less relevant to the target task, are
frozen (their weights are not updated during fine-tuning or
distillation). This is common when adapting a large pre-trained model to
a specific downstream task, preserving general knowledge in lower layers
while specializing upper layers.

## Lightweight Transformer Architecture {#sec:lightweight_architecture}

For tasks like natural language understanding and generation, the
student model is often a smaller version of the Transformer
architecture.

-   **Reduced Layers:** Fewer encoder and/or decoder layers compared to
    the teacher.

-   **Smaller Hidden Dimensions:** Reduced size for embedding layers,
    feed-forward network hidden layers, and attention heads.

-   **Fewer Attention Heads:** A smaller number of attention heads in
    the multi-head attention mechanism.

-   **Shared Parameters:** Techniques like Albert (A Lite BERT) share
    parameters across layers to reduce redundancy.

-   **Alternative Architectures:** Models like DistilBERT, TinyBERT, or
    MobileBERT are designed specifically for efficiency. Gemma models
    also offer smaller variants (e.g., 2B parameters).

The goal is to maintain the core self-attention and feed-forward
mechanisms of the Transformer while significantly reducing the parameter
count to the desired target (e.g.,  1.5 billion parameters).

## Mathematical Principles of Implemented Loss Functions {#sec:math_loss_functions}

### Cross-Entropy Loss (Task Loss)

For classification or generation tasks, the student model is often
trained on the actual task labels. The cross-entropy loss for a single
data point is: $$L_{CE} = - \sum_c y_c \log(p_c)$$ where $y_c$ is the
true probability (1 for the correct class, 0 otherwise for hard labels)
and $p_c$ is the student model's predicted probability for class $c$.
For language modeling, this is calculated over the vocabulary at each
token position.

### KL Divergence Loss (Distillation Loss)

This measures the difference between the probability distribution of the
teacher ($P_T$) and the student ($P_S$), typically after applying
temperature scaling to their logits.
$$L_{KD} = D_{KL}(P_T || P_S) = \sum_i P_T(i) \log\left(\frac{P_T(i)}{P_S(i)}\right)$$
When using soft targets from the teacher (probabilities $q_i$) and
student predictions ($p_i$), both derived with temperature $T$, the loss
is often scaled by $T^2$:
$$L_{Distill} = (T^2) \times \sum_i q_i \log\left(\frac{q_i}{p_i}\right)$$

### Combined Loss

The total loss function during distillation is typically a weighted sum
of the task loss and the distillation loss:
$$L_{Total} = \alpha \cdot L_{Distill} + (1 - \alpha) \cdot L_{CE}$$
where $\alpha$ is a hyperparameter balancing the two terms.

### L1 Regularization Penalty (Pruning)

As mentioned earlier, the L1 penalty added to the total loss to
encourage sparsity is: $$L_{L1} = \lambda \sum_i |\theta_i|$$ So the
final training loss becomes: $$L_{Final} = L_{Total} + L_{L1}$$

## Implementation Details: `distill_demo.py` Script {#sec:distill_demo_walkthrough}

This section provides a walkthrough of the `distill_demo.py` script,
which implements the concepts of knowledge distillation and L1
regularization discussed previously.

### Setup and Configuration

The script begins by defining key parameters:

-   **Model Names:** Specifies Hugging Face model identifiers for the
    teacher (e.g., `deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-R1-0528-Qwen3-8B`) and student
    (e.g., `google/gemma-2b-it`).

-   **Hyperparameters:**

    -   `temperature (T)`: Controls the softness of the teacher's output
        distribution (e.g., 4.0).

    -   `alpha (`$\alpha$`)`: Balances the distillation loss and the
        student's task loss (e.g., 0.9).

    -   `l1_lambda (`$\lambda$`)`: The strength of the L1 regularization
        penalty (e.g., 1e-5).

-   **Device Setup:** Automatically selects CUDA if available, otherwise
    CPU, using `torch.device`.

-   **Dataset Parameters:** Defines the dataset name (e.g.,
    `mlabonne/guanaco-llama2-1k`), a subset to use (e.g.,
    `train[:100]`), max sequence length, and batch size.

### Model and Tokenizer Loading

-   **Tokenizer:** The student model's tokenizer is loaded using
    `AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained`. The script includes logic to handle
    cases where `pad_token_id` is not set by default (common for models
    like Gemma), typically by using the `eos_token_id` or adding a new
    pad token if necessary.

-   **Models:** Both teacher and student models are loaded using
    `AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained`. The teacher model is loaded
    with `trust_remote_code=True` as it might be required for certain
    architectures. Models are moved to the selected device. If the
    tokenizer's vocabulary was expanded (e.g., by adding a pad token),
    the student model's token embeddings are resized using
    `student_model.resize_token_embeddings(len(tokenizer))`.

### Dataset Preparation (`DistillationDataset`)

A custom PyTorch `Dataset` class, `DistillationDataset`, is defined:

-   **Initialization (`__init__`)**: Takes the tokenizer, dataset name,
    split, and max length. It loads the raw dataset (e.g., from Hugging
    Face Hub) and extracts the text portions.

-   **Item Retrieval (`__getitem__`)**:

    1.  Retrieves a text sample.

    2.  Tokenizes the text using the provided tokenizer with
        `max_length`, `padding=’max_length’`, and `truncation=True`.

    3.  `input_ids` are generated from the tokenized output.

    4.  `labels` are created by cloning `input_ids`. In causal language
        modeling, the model learns to predict the next token, and this
        setup (where labels are identical to input ids) is standard. The
        model's internal mechanisms (like attention masks and shifting
        for Causal LMs) handle the \"predict next token\" objective.

-   The `DataLoader` then uses this dataset to provide batches of data
    to the training loop.

### Distillation Training Loop

-   **Model Modes:** The teacher model is set to evaluation mode
    (`teacher_model.eval()`) as its weights are not updated. The student
    model is set to training mode (`student_model.train()`).

-   **Iteration:** The script iterates through batches provided by the
    `DataLoader`. For each batch:

    1.  Input data (`input_ids` and `labels`) is moved to the configured
        device.

    2.  **Teacher Logits:** Predictions from the teacher model are
        obtained within a `torch.no_grad()` context to disable gradient
        calculations. This yields `teacher_logits`.

    3.  **Student Logits:** Predictions from the student model are
        obtained, yielding `student_logits`.

### Loss Calculation

The core of the distillation process involves computing a composite
loss:

1.  **Distillation Loss ($L_{Distill}$):** Calculated using
    Kullback-Leibler divergence. The student's logits are passed through
    `F.log_softmax(student_logits / temperature, dim=-1)`, and the
    teacher's logits through
    `F.softmax(teacher_logits / temperature, dim=-1)`. The result from
    `F.kl_div` is then scaled by `temperature**2`. This corresponds to
    the $L_{Distill}$ formula discussed in Section
    [3.4](#sec:math_loss_functions){reference-type="ref"
    reference="sec:math_loss_functions"}.

2.  **Student Task Loss ($L_{CE}$):** Calculated using
    `F.cross_entropy(student_logits.view(-1, student_logits.size(-1)), labels.view(-1))`.
    The logits and labels are reshaped to be 2D and 1D respectively.
    Padded tokens in the labels are ignored (typically by setting them
    to -100, which is the default `ignore_index` for `CrossEntropyLoss`
    or by ensuring tokenizer's `pad_token_id` is used for this). This
    corresponds to the $L_{CE}$ formula in Section
    [3.4](#sec:math_loss_functions){reference-type="ref"
    reference="sec:math_loss_functions"}.

3.  **Combined Loss ($L_{Total}$):** The two losses are combined using
    the hyperparameter $\alpha$:
    `loss = alpha * loss_distill + (1 - alpha) * loss_student`. This
    matches the $L_{Total}$ formula in Section
    [3.4](#sec:math_loss_functions){reference-type="ref"
    reference="sec:math_loss_functions"}.

4.  **L1 Regularization ($L_{L1}$):** An L1 penalty is calculated by
    iterating through the student model's parameters
    (`param for param in student_model.parameters() if param.requires_grad`),
    summing their absolute values (`torch.abs(param).sum()`), and
    multiplying by `l1_lambda`. This penalty is added to the combined
    loss: `loss += l1_lambda * l1_penalty`. This implements the $L_{L1}$
    formula from Section
    [3.4](#sec:math_loss_functions){reference-type="ref"
    reference="sec:math_loss_functions"}.

<figure id="fig:loss_curve">

<figcaption>Example of training loss curves during
distillation.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Optimization

Standard PyTorch optimization steps are performed:

1.  Gradients are cleared: `optimizer.zero_grad()`.

2.  Backpropagation is performed on the final loss: `loss.backward()`.

3.  Optimizer updates the student model's weights: `optimizer.step()`.

### Model Saving

After the training loop completes, the distilled student model and its
tokenizer are saved to the specified output directory using
`student_model.save_pretrained(output_dir)` and
`tokenizer.save_pretrained(output_dir)`.

# Results {#chap:results}

This chapter presents the empirical findings from the experiments
conducted as part of this thesis. It details the performance of the
various models (teacher, baseline student, distilled student, fine-tuned
student) on the selected evaluation benchmarks and analyzes the
effectiveness of the applied model compression techniques.

## Experimental Setup {#sec:experimental_setup}

This section outlines the environment and parameters used for conducting
the experiments.

-   **Hardware:**

-   **Software:**

-   **Datasets:**

    -   For general distillation:

    -   For fine-tuning:

    -   For benchmarking:

-   **Evaluation Metrics:** Primarily Exact Match (EM) for CS-Bench
    tasks, as implemented in `benchmark_csbench.py`. For the fine-tuned
    model, qualitative examples of outputs for electronics-related
    prompts may also be presented. Model size (parameter count, on-disk
    size) is a key metric for compression.

## Teacher Model Baseline Performance {#sec:teacher_baseline}

The teacher model, `deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-R1-0528-Qwen3-8B`, was
evaluated on selected tasks from the CS-Bench repository to establish a
performance baseline. The results are summarized below.

### Placeholder Table for Teacher Model Results

Placeholder for teacher model performance table. User needs to run
`benchmark_csbench.py` for each relevant CS-Bench task and populate
this, detailing which task corresponds to which score.

## Student Model Performance Evaluation {#sec:student_performance}

This section details the performance of the student model
(`google/gemma-2b-it`) at various stages: before distillation
(baseline), after distillation, and after fine-tuning on the custom
dataset.

### Baseline Student Model (Before Distillation) {#ssec:student_baseline}

The baseline student model, `google/gemma-2b-it`, was evaluated on the
same CS-Bench tasks as the teacher model to provide a reference point
before any compression techniques were applied. Placeholder for baseline
student model performance table. User needs to run
`benchmark_csbench.py` and populate this, similar to the teacher model
table.

### Student Model After Distillation {#ssec:student_after_distillation}

After the distillation process using `distill_demo.py` (which included
L1 regularization), the resulting student model was re-evaluated on the
CS-Bench tasks. Placeholder for distilled student model performance
table and analysis. Key aspects to discuss:

-   CS-Bench scores compared to baseline student and teacher.

-   Percentage of performance retained from teacher vs. percentage of
    parameters.

-   Parameter count of the distilled model (e.g., from Hugging Face
    model card or by summing parameters) and its size on disk.

### Student Model After Fine-tuning (on Custom Dataset) {#ssec:student_after_finetuning}

The distilled student model was further fine-tuned using
`finetune_student.py` on the custom 'electronic_circuit_questions.jsonl'
dataset to specialize its knowledge in electronic technology design.
Placeholder for fine-tuned student model performance. Evaluation
strategies:

-   If a test split of 'electronic_circuit_questions.jsonl' was created:
    report metrics like perplexity or accuracy on this split.

-   Qualitative assessment: Provide examples of prompts related to
    electronics and the model's generated answers, comparing them to
    perhaps the distilled-only student or even the teacher.

-   If relevant CS-Bench tasks exist for electronics/circuits, evaluate
    there. Otherwise, acknowledge this model is specialized away from
    general CS tasks.

## Pruning Effects {#sec:pruning_effects}

The L1 regularization applied during the distillation phase (in
`distill_demo.py`) is intended to induce sparsity in the student model's
weights, effectively pruning less important connections by driving their
values towards zero. Placeholder for discussion on pruning effects.
Considerations:

-   While `distill_demo.py` adds the L1 penalty, it doesn't
    automatically remove parameters. True physical pruning (removing
    zero-valued weights to reduce model size and potentially speed up
    inference) would require an additional step not covered by the
    script.

-   User could analyze the weight distribution of the saved student
    model (e.g., using PyTorch to load weights and plot histograms) to
    see if L1 regularization resulted in a higher concentration of
    weights near zero compared to the baseline student model. This would
    visually support the \"pruning pressure.\" Refer to the placeholder
    Figure [3.2](#fig:param_dist){reference-type="ref"
    reference="fig:param_dist"}.

# Discussion {#chap:discussion}

This chapter provides an interpretation of the results presented in
Chapter [4](#chap:results){reference-type="ref"
reference="chap:results"}, discusses their significance in the context
of creating efficient models for specialized domains like electronic
technology design, and addresses the limitations of the current study.

## Analysis of Results {#sec:analysis_of_results}

A detailed comparison of the performance metrics (e.g., CS-Bench scores,
qualitative assessments for custom tasks) between the teacher model, the
baseline student model, the distilled student model, and the fine-tuned
student model will be conducted here. The effectiveness of the knowledge
distillation process in transferring knowledge while reducing parameters
will be analyzed. The impact of fine-tuning on the custom
'electronic_circuit_questions.jsonl' dataset on the student model's
proficiency in the target domain will also be critically examined. The
actual parameter count reduction and any observed efficiency gains
(e.g., inference speed, if measured) will be discussed.

## Implications of the Work {#sec:implications_of_work}

The development of a smaller, yet competent, language model specialized
for electronic technology design carries several potential benefits.
These include the possibility of deploying such models in environments
with limited computational resources (e.g., on-device for EDA tools,
embedded systems for diagnostic purposes), reduced inference latency for
real-time applications, lower operational costs, and enhanced privacy if
local deployment becomes feasible. This work demonstrates a pathway to
achieving such specialized, efficient models.

## Limitations of the Current Study {#sec:limitations_of_study}

This study has several limitations that should be acknowledged:

-   The custom dataset for fine-tuning
    ('electronic_circuit_questions.jsonl') is currently a placeholder
    and its size and quality will significantly impact the fine-tuning
    outcome.

-   The choice of teacher and student models, as well as hyperparameters
    for distillation and fine-tuning, were based on common practices but
    were not exhaustively optimized. Different choices might yield
    different results.

-   The evaluation on CS-Bench was limited to tasks selected by the
    user; a broader evaluation might yield different comparative
    insights or reveal weaknesses in other areas.

-   The current pruning approach (L1 regularization) is implicit. True
    physical pruning to reduce model size/latency was not implemented as
    a subsequent step.

-   Inference speed and detailed computational cost analysis were not
    part of the primary evaluation metrics for the scripts provided,
    though model size reduction is a proxy.

-   The evaluation of the fine-tuned model's specialized knowledge might
    be primarily qualitative if a dedicated test set for electronics
    questions is not available.

## Future Work {#sec:future_work_discussion}

Based on the findings and limitations of this study, several avenues for
future research can be proposed:

-   Development and curation of a larger, high-quality, and more diverse
    dataset for electronic technology design to improve fine-tuning and
    enable robust quantitative evaluation of specialized knowledge.

-   Exploration of more advanced distillation techniques (e.g.,
    feature-based distillation, intermediate layer matching,
    self-distillation).

-   Implementation and evaluation of structured pruning methods (e.g.,
    filter pruning, layer removal) or iterative magnitude pruning with
    fine-tuning cycles to achieve actual model size reduction and
    potential speedups.

-   More extensive benchmarking across a wider range of CS-Bench tasks
    and other relevant NLP benchmarks, particularly those that might
    test reasoning in technical domains.

-   Quantitative analysis of inference speed, memory usage, and energy
    consumption of the compressed models on target hardware.

-   Investigation into quantization techniques (e.g., 8-bit, 4-bit)
    applied post-distillation/pruning for further compression.

-   Comparative studies with other student model architectures or sizes.

# Conclusions {#chap:conclusions_final}

This thesis investigated model compression techniques, specifically
knowledge distillation and L1 regularization-induced pruning, to develop
a smaller, more efficient student model from a larger teacher model,
with a focus on applications in electronic technology design. A
comprehensive methodology was established, encompassing the selection of
appropriate models, the design of the distillation process, strategies
for fine-tuning on a custom domain-specific dataset, and procedures for
benchmarking the performance of the resulting models (as detailed in
Chapter [3](#chap:methods){reference-type="ref"
reference="chap:methods"}).

The study provided a suite of tools and implemented procedures for
carrying out these steps, including the `distill_demo.py` script for
knowledge distillation and L1 regularization, the `finetune_student.py`
script for specialized dataset adaptation, and the
`benchmark_csbench.py` script for comparative evaluation against
established benchmarks.

While the full experimental results and their in-depth analysis are to
be incorporated by the user based on their specific runs of these
scripts (Chapter [4](#chap:results){reference-type="ref"
reference="chap:results"} and Chapter
[5](#chap:discussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="chap:discussion"}), the framework itself demonstrates a
viable and structured path towards creating efficient, specialized
language models. Key findings based on the implemented framework are
expected to show a trade-off between model size reduction and
performance, with knowledge distillation effectively transferring
capabilities from the teacher to the student, and fine-tuning further
enhancing proficiency on domain-specific tasks. The L1 regularization is
anticipated to contribute to model sparsity, paving the way for
potential pruning.

Future work, as outlined in Section
[5.4](#sec:future_work_discussion){reference-type="ref"
reference="sec:future_work_discussion"}, could involve the development
of larger custom datasets, exploration of more advanced compression
techniques like structured pruning and quantization, more extensive
benchmarking, and ultimately, the deployment of the optimized student
model in real-world electronic design applications. This research
provides a foundational toolkit and methodology for such endeavors.

# Supplemental Material (Example) {#app:supplemental}

This appendix can contain supplemental information, such as extended
data tables, code snippets (if not fully in text), or detailed
configurations. Placeholder for content.
